\section{The API Aspect}\label{api-aspect}

The Web APIs provide language-agnostic, location-agnostic authenticated access
to LSST data.  They are intended to be used by client tools and automated
processes.  They are not optimized or supported for direct human use via a
browser, although they can be used that way.  The available endpoints and the
URL structures they accept will be documented.

The Web APIs are undergoing detailed design.  Initial prototypes exist that
provide non-VO-compliant access to catalogs, images, image mosaics, and image
cutouts.  This section describes the ultimate goals for the LSP Web APIs and
documents design features where they are already known.

\subsection{Overview - VO services and custom LSST services}\label{api-overview}

The Web APIs support standard VO protocols where possible.  They will also
support extensions to the VO protocols and additional custom LSST services that
are useful for the Portal Aspect or JupyterLab Aspect.  To the extent that it
makes sense, such extensions will be proposed to the IVOA for incorporation
into the standard protocols.

\subsection{Catalog and other tabular data access}\label{catalog-and-other-tabular-data-access}

Catalogs, metadata, provenance, and other tabular data are accessed through the
\texttt{dbserv} endpoint. For metadata and provenance, table schemas, when
possible, will be reused from VO or community standards, such as CAOM2
\citep{CAOM2} and others.

\subsubsection{TAP service}\label{tap-and-other-vo-compliant-services}

\texttt{dbserv} is the LSST implementation of IVOA's TAP interface.
\texttt{dbserv} will target compliance with TAP 1.1 once it is recommended
by the IVOA.

\subsubsection{ADQL implementation}\label{adql-implementation}

Internal to dbserv is an ADQL parser. This parser will target compliance with
ADQL 2.1 once it reaches recommended status.  In addition to that, SQL language
features of underlying databases will be made available, when possible.  Some
capabilities will be restricted if a database does not support them, such as
subqueries which do not perform well in a distributed database system.

\subsubsection{Return data formats}\label{return-data-formats}

As \texttt{dbserv} will be TAP compliant, it will support the VOTable output
specified by TAP 1.1, which should be version 1.3. Additional encoding
protocols for VOTable output will be supported, including JSON and SQLite
output, which were chosen for the ability to represent metadata in-line with
VOTable data. For all output formats, gzip compression through the HTTP
protocol will be supported and encouraged.

\subsection{Image data access}\label{image-data-access}

Image discovery, metadata, and data retrieval will be available through
the \texttt{imgserv} endpoint.

\subsubsection{Image finding}\label{image-finding}

Image discovery will be facilitated through an implementation of the IVOA SIA
V2 interface. Simple implementations of SIA allow direct access to files
available via HTTP by adding a link to the SIA response; \texttt{imgserv} will
use that attribute in the SIA response to link to another service. Image
metadata will also be facilitated through TAP, as image metadata will be
available according in the database through implementations of the IVOA ObsCore
Data Model \citep{2011ivoa.spec.1028T} and the CAOM2 data model, as well as LSST-native
image metadata representations.

\subsubsection{Image retrieval}\label{image-retrieval}

Images may be retrieved via the URL returned in an SIA request, in the case
images can be directly served over HTTP, or via a SODA implementation. The LSST
SODA implementation will also offer enhancements to implement project-specific
goals without presenting additional interfaces to science users. For example,
key/value pairs as used by the Data Butler client may be provided.

\subsection{Metadata access}\label{metadata-access}

Catalog and image metadata can be accessed via TAP query to provided
metadata tables.

\subsubsection{Data Releases}\label{data-releases}

Each Data Release has its own set of tables.  These are expected to differ in
schema between Data Releases.  In addition, the image and catalog metadata
available for each Data Release will vary.  Finally, identifiers within
catalogs and images (except raw image identifiers) will vary between Data
Releases.

Accordingly, the Data Release number is a key parameter that must be
presented to the Web APIs.  Collections of datasets that are not part of
a Data Release (e.g.\ in-process, unreleased data or intermediate data
products) are assigned labels that are used in place of the Data Release
number.

The number of Data Releases available through the LSP and therefore the Web
APIs aspect is discussed in section~\ref{support-of-previous-releases},

\subsubsection{Tables}\label{tables}

Available tables include those in \citeds{LDM-153}.

Catalog and image metadata tables will be implemented through IVOA and
community standards, when possible, such as those laid out by IVOA's ObsCore
DM, VOResource/RegTap, and the CAOM2 data model. Even if direct usage of those
models is not feasible, a best-effort export to them will be performed.  In
such a case, the "native" metadta tables will be documented for direct access
by users through TAP.

\subsubsection{Table Structure}\label{table-structure}

Each table will have associated metadata that records, for each column, a
description, UCD when appropriate, unit when appropriate, and any relationship
with other columns (e.g. so several columns making up a covariance matrix can
be identified as such without resorting to pattern-matching of column names).

\subsection{User Workspace access}\label{user-workspace-access}

WebDAV and/or VOSpace will be provided for user workspace access.
